README.md, before:

This is a [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/) backend for [sátni.org](http://sátni.org) that uses [Mongodb](https://www.mongodb.com/) to serve a GraphQL-endpoint to the [sátni.org-frontend](https://github.com/divvun/satni-frontend) application.

# Prerequites
* Install and setup mongodb
* Checkout the langtech svn repo parallel to this one (svn checkout https://gtsvn.uit.no/langtech/trunk langtech)
* Set the environment variable GTHOME to point to the working copy of langtech
* Fetch [poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation)

# Initial setup
* cp .env.example to .env
* set the app secret (follow the link in .env)
* set the mongodb username and password

```bash
poetry install # install dependencies
poetry run python manage.py migrate # migrate the database
poetry run python manage.py runscript from_dump # import content from langtech
```

## Development
Set DEBUG=True in .env, then run the following command

```bash
poetry run python manage.py runserver
```

Find out which queries are available by going to the built-in GraphQL IDE at http://localhost:8000/graphql/

## Null the database, migrate and import content
```bash
./init_backend.sh
```

The startup of this repo was the [Django and GraphQL intro](https://www.howtographql.com/graphql-python/1-getting-started/)

# Queries

The examples below query the production server. If you'd like to do queries on the development server, use the url `http://localhost:8000/graphql/` instead of `https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/`

Get all the possible queries

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '{"query":"{ __schema{  queryType { fields{ name } } } }"}'
```

Gives this answer:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "__schema": {
      "queryType": {
        "fields": [
          {
            "name": "conceptList"
          },
          {
            "name": "dictEntryList"
          },
          {
            "name": "stemList"
          },
          {
            "name": "hasStem"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## stemList

Search the database for lookup words.

Download [lemmas.json](lemmas.json) and run the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@lemmas.json'
```

This command looks for first hundred search words starting with "arg" from our database. The variable `inputValue` is used to define what we look for.
The list `srcLangs` tells which languages the search word should be in, the list `targetLangs` tells which languages the search should have a translation for.
The list `wantedDicts` tells which dictionaries we would like answers from.

Edit `lemmas.json` to experiment with the query.

## conceptList and dictEntryList

Get dictionary and terminology articles.

Download [articles.json](articles.json) and run the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@articles.json'
```

This command looks for articles that has `bil` as a lookup word. The variable `lemma` is used to define this. `lemma` must be an exact hit, usually this is fetched from the stemlist.
The list `srcLangs` tells which languages the lookup word should be in, the list `targetLangs` tells which languages the lookup word should have a translation for.
The list `wantedDicts` tells which dictionaries we would like answers from.

Edit `articles.json` to experiment with the query.

## hasStem

Used to decide whether `stem` is in the stemList. In [satni-frontend](https://github.com/divvun/satni-frontend) this is used to decide if a reverse lookup can be done from a translation.
The list `targetLangs` tells which languages the lookup word should have a translation for.
The list `wantedDicts` tells which dictionaries we would like answers from.

Download [hasStem.json](hasStem.json) and run the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@hasStem.json'
```

## lemmatised

Used to analyse wordforms sent to the lemmatiser.

The lemmatiser returns a list containing info about the language of the lemmatiser, a list of lemmatised wordforms and a list of analyses of the queried wordform.

The list of lemmatised wordforms can be used to query the dictionaries, the analyses can be used to explain the different analyses of the given wordform.

To see and example of the results of this query, download [lemmatised.json](lemmatised.json) and run the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@lemmatised.json'
```

## Find all capabilities

To get a complete overview what this backend offers, download [all.json](all.json) and do the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@all.json'
```

Commit message:

Notes on how to set up and use the hfst system packages

README.md, after:

This is a [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/) backend for [sátni.org](http://sátni.org) that uses [Mongodb](https://www.mongodb.com/) to serve a GraphQL-endpoint to the [sátni.org-frontend](https://github.com/divvun/satni-frontend) application.

The development of this backend is most easily done in a Linux environment. On Mac, the needed fsts must be compiled and installed from source.

# Prerequites
* Install and setup mongodb
* Install [apertium-nightly](https://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Install_Apertium_core_using_packaging)
  * Install the packages giella-fin, giella-nob, giella-sma, giella-sme, giella-smj, giella-smn, giella-sms, python3-hfst
* Checkout the langtech svn repo parallel to this one (svn checkout https://gtsvn.uit.no/langtech/trunk langtech)
* Set the environment variable GTHOME to point to the working copy of langtech
* Fetch [poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation)

# Initial setup
* cp .env.example to .env
* set the app secret (follow the link in .env)
* set the mongodb username and password

```bash
poetry install # install dependencies
```

Use `poetry env list` and `poetry config --list` to find out where the active
virtual environment is. Open the file `pyvenv.cfg`, change the line
`include-system-site-packages = false` to `include-system-site-packages = true`.
This step is needed because hfst sometimes is uninstallable using poetry (pip,
setuptools), and we need to use the system packages instead.

```bash
poetry run python manage.py migrate # migrate the database
poetry run python manage.py runscript from_dump # import content from langtech
```

## Development
Set DEBUG=True in .env, then run the following command

```bash
poetry run python manage.py runserver
```

Find out which queries are available by going to the built-in GraphQL IDE at http://localhost:8000/graphql/

## Null the database, migrate and import content
```bash
./init_backend.sh
```

The startup of this repo was the [Django and GraphQL intro](https://www.howtographql.com/graphql-python/1-getting-started/)

# Queries

The examples below query the production server. If you'd like to do queries on the development server, use the url `http://localhost:8000/graphql/` instead of `https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/`

Get all the possible queries

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '{"query":"{ __schema{  queryType { fields{ name } } } }"}'
```

Gives this answer:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "__schema": {
      "queryType": {
        "fields": [
          {
            "name": "conceptList"
          },
          {
            "name": "dictEntryList"
          },
          {
            "name": "stemList"
          },
          {
            "name": "hasStem"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## stemList

Search the database for lookup words.

Download [lemmas.json](lemmas.json) and run the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@lemmas.json'
```

This command looks for first hundred search words starting with "arg" from our database. The variable `inputValue` is used to define what we look for.
The list `srcLangs` tells which languages the search word should be in, the list `targetLangs` tells which languages the search should have a translation for.
The list `wantedDicts` tells which dictionaries we would like answers from.

Edit `lemmas.json` to experiment with the query.

## conceptList and dictEntryList

Get dictionary and terminology articles.

Download [articles.json](articles.json) and run the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@articles.json'
```

This command looks for articles that has `bil` as a lookup word. The variable `lemma` is used to define this. `lemma` must be an exact hit, usually this is fetched from the stemlist.
The list `srcLangs` tells which languages the lookup word should be in, the list `targetLangs` tells which languages the lookup word should have a translation for.
The list `wantedDicts` tells which dictionaries we would like answers from.

Edit `articles.json` to experiment with the query.

## hasStem

Used to decide whether `stem` is in the stemList. In [satni-frontend](https://github.com/divvun/satni-frontend) this is used to decide if a reverse lookup can be done from a translation.
The list `targetLangs` tells which languages the lookup word should have a translation for.
The list `wantedDicts` tells which dictionaries we would like answers from.

Download [hasStem.json](hasStem.json) and run the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@hasStem.json'
```

## lemmatised

Used to analyse wordforms sent to the lemmatiser.

The lemmatiser returns a list containing info about the language of the lemmatiser, a list of lemmatised wordforms and a list of analyses of the queried wordform.

The list of lemmatised wordforms can be used to query the dictionaries, the analyses can be used to explain the different analyses of the given wordform.

To see and example of the results of this query, download [lemmatised.json](lemmatised.json) and run the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@lemmatised.json'
```

## Find all capabilities

To get a complete overview what this backend offers, download [all.json](all.json) and do the command:

```bash
curl https://satni.uit.no/newsatni/ \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-H 'Accept: application/json' \
--compressed \
--data-binary '@all.json'
```
